https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_mesh_networking
Bluetooth Mesh is a computer mesh networking standard based on Bluetooth Low Energy that allows for many-to-many communication over Bluetooth radio. The Bluetooth Mesh specifications were defined in the Mesh Profile[1] and Mesh Model[2] specifications by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (Bluetooth SIG). Bluetooth Mesh was conceived in 2014[3] and adopted on July 13, 2017 (2017-07-13).[4] Bluetooth Mesh is a mesh networking standard that operates on a flood network principle. It's based on the nodes relaying the messages: every relay node that receives a network packet that authenticates against a known network key that is not in message cache, that has a TTL ≥ 2 can be retransmitted with TTL = TTL - 1. Message caching is used to prevent relaying messages recently seen. Communication is carried in the messages that may be up to 384 bytes long, when using Segmentation and Reassembly (SAR) mechanism, but most of the messages fit in one segment, that is 11 bytes. Each message starts with an opcode, which may be a single byte (for special messages), 2 bytes (for standard messages), or 3 bytes (for vendor-specific messages). Every message has a source and a destination address, determining which devices process messages. Devices publish messages to destinations which can be single things / groups of things / everything. Each message has a sequence number that protects the network against replay attacks. Each message is encrypted and authenticated. Two keys are used to secure messages: (1) network keys – allocated to a single mesh network, (2) application keys – specific for a given application functionality, e.g. turning the light on vs reconfiguring the light. Messages have a time to live (TTL). Each time message is received and retransmitted, TTL is decremented which limits the number of "hops", eliminating endless loops. Bluetooth Mesh has a layered architecture, with multiple layers as below. Nodes that support the various features can be formed into a mesh network. to enable larger networks. advertising bearers. duty cycles only in conjunction with a node supporting the Friend feature. messages destined for those nodes. The practical limits of Bluetooth Mesh technology are unknown. Some limits that are built into the specification include: Number of virtual groups is 2128. As of version 1.0 of Bluetooth Mesh specification,[2] the following standard models and model groups have been defined: Foundation models have been defined in the core specification. Two of them are mandatory for all mesh nodes. Provisioning is a process of installing the device into a network. It is a mandatory step to build a Bluetooth Mesh network. In the provisioning process, a provisioner securely distributes a network key and a unique address space for a device. The provisioning protocol uses P256 Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange to create a temporary key to encrypt network key and other information. This provides security from a passive eavesdropper.  It also provides various authentication mechanisms to protect network information, from an active eavesdropper who uses man-in-the-middle attack, during provisioning process. A key unique to a device known as "Device Key" is derived from elliptic curve shared secret on provisioner and device during the provisioning process. This device key is used by the provisioner to encrypt messages for that specific device. The security of the provisioning process has been analyzed in a paper presented during the IEEE CNS 2018 conference.[5] The provisioning can be performed using a Bluetooth GATT connection or advertising using the specific bearer.[1] Free software and open source software implementations include the following: