https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:CS1_maint:_unfit_URL
This hidden tracking category lists pages with CS1 citations that use |url-status=usurped or |url-status=unfit. The keywords unfit and usurped are intended to identify original URLs that point to live sites that are inappropriate: spam, advertising, porn, etc. A URL that returns a HTTP 404 error is not considered to be unfit and, in such cases, editors should set |url-status=dead. CS1 and CS2 templates in pages listed in this category should be checked to ensure that the unfit and usurped keywords are correctly applied. Only Module:Citation/CS1 should directly add pages to this category. Pages with this condition are automatically placed in Category:CS1 maint: unfit URL.[a] By default, Citation Style 1 and Citation Style 2 error messages are visible to all readers and maintenance messages are hidden from all readers. To display maintenance messages, include the following text in your common CSS page (common.css) or your specific skin's CSS page and (skin.css). (Note to new editors: those are pages that are specific to you, and control your view of pages, by adding to the CSS code. If you have not yet created such a page, then clicking one of the .css links above will yield a page that starts "Wikipedia does not have a user page with this exact name." Click the link "Start the User:username/filename page" link, paste the text below, save the page, follow the instructions at the bottom of the new page on bypassing your browser's cache, and finally, in order to see the previously hidden maintenance messages, refresh the page you were editing earlier.) To display hidden-by-default error messages: Even with this CSS installed, older pages in Wikipedia's cache may not have been updated to show these error messages even though the page is listed in one of the tracking categories. A null edit will resolve that issue. To hide normally-displayed error messages: You can personalize the display of these messages (such as changing the color), but you will need to ask someone who knows CSS or at the technical village pump if you do not understand how. Nota bene: these css rules are not obeyed by Navigation popups.  The following 200 pages are in this category, out of approximately 24,964 total. This list may not reflect recent changes.