https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Interlanguage_links
Interlanguage links are links from a page in one Wikipedia language to an equivalent page in another language. These links can appear as links in the "Languages" section of the page's left sidebar. Less commonly, for certain situations these can appear as inline links in the text of the article. These two types of links are created and handled differently.  Pages on Wikipedia can link to equivalent pages in other languages. The English article on Spain includes a link to the Spanish article España in the sidebar, and vice versa. These links can be maintained in two places: in Wikidata and by using local links in the text of the page itself. Using Wikidata is the preferred method. Wikidata is a sister project of Wikipedia, it is a collaboratively edited knowledge base. Part of this project is to centralize the interlanguage links for all the Wikipedia projects. The Wikidata entry for a page in the left sidebar contains (among other things) a list of links for that page in different languages and it is the standard procedure to add interlanguage links. "Languages" in the sidebar shows the Wikidata language list. At the bottom is a link labelled "Edit links" (mobile viewers may lack such a feature). Clicking on this will reveal the Wikidata page: If you get an error message like "Site link ... is already used by item Q ...", this means that there is already an item in Wikidata pointing to the article you are trying to link to. Wikidata does not allow more than one item to point to a single article in a Wikipedia. There are then two cases: It may take several minutes for the link to show up in the article's sidebar. Especially, to enable links between templates, you must explicitly purge the server's cache for each template. There are many ways Wikipedia articles of another language can be found. These include translating the article's title and its synonyms to other languages and searching for them on the respective language-versions of Wikipedia or on Google, searching for articletitle site:wikipedia.org -site:en.wikipedia.org (for non-English Wikipedia articles), checking the other language versions of related or superordinate articles and checking the other language versions of the article's categories. To edit an entry on Wikidata, click on the edit link next to the entry you wish to edit. A textbox will appear allowing you to edit the entry. Click on save when you are done. You can remove a page from the list of Wikidata's links. To do so click edit, then click on the remove link. Before 2013, the only method of generating a link in the sidebar to the article in another language was to use a "local" interlanguage link in the text of the page itself. As of 2013, the use of such "local links" for interlanguage linking has been deprecated except in the situations listed below, with interlanguage link data being centralized on Wikidata. The problem with this approach was that each language had to maintain its own separate lists. So for example, if the name of a page on the English Wikipedia changed, then each language that linked to that page would have to separately notice this fact and then change their own links. For most pages, these links are no longer needed and can be safely removed, but you should verify that the local list and the Wikidata lists match before doing so. There is an automated tool to help with that. The local links do however still serve some purposes: Although generally no longer required, to force the generation of a "local" interlanguage link in the Language sidebar of the article, use the following form: where the language code is the two-letter code as per ISO 639-1. (see complete list of language Wikipedias available. English is "en", German is "de", etc.) So for example in the English language article on plankton, which is available on many other wikis, the "local" interlanguage links might look like this: NOTE: These links are treated specially, and don't show up in the body of the text, but in a special sidebar section "Languages" listed by language name. They can go anywhere in the article source as their placement does not alter the visual appearance of the links on the rendered page except for the order. However, the convention is to put them at the bottom of the page. Remember, you only need these type links if you are overriding the information from Wikidata, otherwise you should edit the links on the Wikidata entry. Featured or good articles are represented via Wikidata.  When the English Wikipedia doesn't have an article, the links to it show up as red links. For example, we don't have an article on Erich Anders (it shows up as a red link), but the German Wikipedia does. It is possible to: On the English Wikipedia, links to pages that do not exist are displayed in a different color (usually red). But this check is not performed for links to pages on another wiki (including other Wikimedia Foundation sites). Unlike internal links, these links do not indicate whether the target page exists or not.[1] If the target page does not exist, the link leads to a message on the target wiki informing you that the page does not exist and inviting you to create it. If you find interlanguage links to non-existent pages on the English Wikipedia, they may be deleted as having no content. Alternatively, you can create at least a stub page on the target wiki before adding an interlanguage link to it. Later, interested people can complete the rest of the page. Note: if the language prefix is wrong, it is considered to be part of the name of a page on the English Wikipedia. This page will probably not exist, so the link will be displayed in red. The {{interlanguage link}} template can help with this. You can also link to Wikipedia pages in other languages by using external links, in the same way as linking to other sites on the Internet. This method should not be used in the body of an article, but it may be useful on User pages or Talk pages. For example, this method can be used to link to diff pages that show the editing history of a page on another Wikipedia. The following code: renders as: Templates {{Cross-wiki language diff}} and {{Cross-wiki language free diff}} are also available to construct diffs for other languages and projects, as is the special-page term :Diff/: [[:fr:Special:Diff/96480208]] will show the same diff as above. https://qrpedia.org/ offers a tool to create a multilingual link to a Wikipedia article in any language. The user's browser will be redirected to the corresponding page in the language of the browser. Just replace en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ with en.qrwp.org/ in the URL to get a multilingual link. For example: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat, if changed to https://en.qrwp.org/Cat, will be redirected in a French browser to https://fr.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chat. You can also make QR codes using the tool at: https://qrpedia.org/ and 3D print them into plaques for zoos, botanical gardens, monuments, etc. using https://printer.tools/qrcode2stl/