https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberalism_in_Japan
Japanese liberalism (自由主義 or リベラリズム)[note 1] formed in the nineteenth century as a reaction against traditional society. In the twentieth century 'liberal' (自由) gradually became a synonym for conservative, and today the main conservative party in the country is named Liberal Democratic Party (Jiyu Minshuto). The defunct Democratic Party (Minshuto) was considered in part a centrist-liberal party, as are most parties which derived from it. The liberal character of the Liberal League (Jiyu Rengo) is disputed, as it is also considered to be conservative by some. This article is limited to liberal (リベラル) parties with substantial support, proved by having had representation in parliament. The sign ⇒ means a reference to another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it isn't necessary that parties labelled themselves "liberal". Liberals in Japan are generally considered united by one major factor: their opposition to changing the post-World War II constitution forbidding the creation of a national military.[2] Before the 1990s, Japanese liberals did not form a prominent individual political party. Since the 1990s, most conservative liberals have left the LDP. The JNP and Sakigake are the parties founded by Japanese conservative liberals against the LDP's nationalist project, which now lead to the DPJ-liberalism tradition. Japan's modern liberal party, DPJ, which has been in full swing since the 1990s, was led by moderates of the right-wing LDP and left-wing JSP. Currently, the LDP has not been considered a liberal party. In the past, liberals in the LDP became opposition forces after leaving the party, so "liberal" generally became a force against "conservative" in Japanese politics in the 21st century. The current DPJ-liberalism tradition is being continued by the CDPJ.[6] Since Japanese conservatism was influenced by Shintoism, Japan's radical liberalism and democratic socialism against it were influenced by Christianity.[7] As the LDP becomes an increasingly solid conservative party, and the socialist movement that led the traditional anti-LDP camp has lost control in Japan's opposition political camp, gradually shifting from the centre to centre-right "liberal" in the European sense of the past to the centre-left "liberal" in the American sense. Currently, the LDP is the largest right-wing conservative party in Japan, and the CDPJ is the largest centre-left liberal party in Japan.