https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:Cite_web
This Citation Style 1 template is used to create citations for web sources that are not characterized by another CS1 template. Do not use this template in the "External links" section of articles. Copy a blank version to use. Almost all parameter names are supported only in lower case (some initialisms, such as |isbn= have upper-case aliases like |ISBN=, which are acceptable for use). Use the "|" (pipe) character between each parameter. Unused parameters may be deleted to avoid clutter in the edit window. Some samples on this documentation page may include the current date. If the date is not current, then purge the page. For references with author credit For references without author credit  Before 2014, editors had to decide whether to use {{cite web}} or {{cite news}} based on their features. In 2014, most of the differences between the two templates were eliminated. As of 29 July 2016, {{cite web}} and {{cite news}} have the following differences: But given the same set of valid parameters, their output is exactly the same: When this template detects a link whose URL includes an extension of ".pdf" or ".PDF", typical of PDF files, it automatically displays a PDF icon after the link (regardless of whether the link goes to a PDF file or to an HTML landing page, typical of paysites). It also internally acts as if |format=PDF had been specified, which displays " (PDF)" after the icon. (In this case, an explicit |format=PDF parameter would be redundant, so it is not recommended to add it. Users may remove it. Citation bot, when invoked, will remove it. (ref)) If the link is to a PDF file that is not automatically recognizable by its extension, this template does not display the PDF icon. You may add the parameter |format=PDF, which displays " (PDF)" after the link. For links to files in other formats, no icon is displayed. For example, for an .odt file, you may add the parameter |format=ODT, which displays " (ODT)" after the link. Nested parameters rely on their parent parameters: By default, sets of fields are terminated with a period (.). This template embeds COinS metadata in the HTML output, allowing reference management software to retrieve bibliographic metadata. See Wikipedia:COinS. As a general rule, only one data item per parameter. Do not include explanatory or alternate text: Use of templates within the citation template is discouraged because many of these templates will add extraneous HTML or CSS that will be included raw in the metadata. Also, HTML entities, for example &nbsp;, &ndash;, etc., should not be used in parameters that contribute to the metadata.   Note: This table of metadata is displayed in the documentation of all Citation Style 1 templates. Not all of these parameters are supported by every CS1 template. Some of these parameters are mutually exclusive, some are aliases of another parameter, and some require other parameters to be present. A full list of this template's supported parameters, their aliases, and their dependencies is shown in the Usage section near the top of this documentation page.  (See also Help:Citation Style 1 § Titles and chapters.)  URLs must begin with a supported URI scheme. http:// and https:// will be supported by all browsers; however, ftp://, gopher://, irc://, ircs://, mailto: and news: may require a plug-in or an external application and should normally be avoided. IPv6 host-names are currently not supported. If URLs in citation template parameters contain certain characters, then they will not display and link correctly. Those characters need to be percent-encoded. For example, a space must be replaced by %20. To encode the URL, replace the following characters with: Single apostrophes do not need to be encoded; however, unencoded multiples will be parsed as italic or bold markup. Single curly closing braces also do not need to be encoded; however, an unencoded pair will be parsed as the double closing braces for the template transclusion. See § url. The following identifiers create links and are designed to accept a single value. Using multiple values or other text will break the link and/or invalidate the identifier. In general, the parameters should include only the variable part of the identifier, e.g. |rfc=822 or |pmc=345678. In very rare cases, valid identifiers (f.e., as actually printed on publications) do not follow their defined standard format or use non-conforming checksums, which would typically cause an error message to be shown. Do not alter them to match a different checksum. In order to suppress the error message, some identifiers (|doi=, |eissn=, |isbn=, |issn=, and |sbn=) support a special accept-this-as-written markup which can be applied to disable the error-checking (as |<param>=((<value>))). If the problem is down to a mere typographical error in a third-party source, correct the identifier value instead of overriding the error message. For some identifiers, it is possible to specify the access status using the corresponding |<param>-access= parameter. For {{cite journal}}, some identifiers (specifying free resources) will automatically be linked to the title when |url= and |title-link= are not used to specify a different link target. This behaviour can be overridden by one out of a number of special keywords for |title-link= to manually select a specific source (|title-link=pmc or |title-link=doi) for auto-linking or to disable the feature (|title-link=none). It is not necessary to specify a URL to a link identical to a link also produced by an identifier. The |url= parameter (or |title-link=) can then be used for providing a direct deep link to the corresponding document or a convenience link to a resource that would not otherwise be obviously accessible.  These parameters are deprecated.  If the source that they name is important to the Wikipedia article, create a separate cs1|2 template for that source.  Citations of online sources that require registration or a subscription are acceptable in Wikipedia as documented in Verifiability § Access to sources. As a courtesy to readers and other editors, editors should signal restrictions on access to material provided via the external links included in a citation. These levels describe requirements or constraints related to accessing and viewing the cited material; they are not intended to indicate the ability to reuse, or the copyright status, of the material, since that status is not relevant to verifying claims in articles.  Four access levels can be used: As there are often multiple external links with different access levels in the same citation, each value is attributed to a specific external link. Online sources linked by |url=, |article-url=, |chapter-url=, |contribution-url=, |entry-url=, |map-url=, and |section-url= are presumed to be free-to-read. When they are not free-to-read, editors should mark those sources with the matching access-indicator parameter so that an appropriate icon is included in the rendered citation. Because the sources linked by these url-holding parameters are presumed to be free-to-read, they may not be marked as free. For example, this cites a web page that requires registration but not subscription: which renders as: Links inserted by named identifiers are presumed to lie behind a paywall or registration barrier – exceptions listed below. When they are free-to-read, editors should mark those sources with the matching access-indicator parameter so that an appropriate icon is included in the rendered citation.  When the sources linked by these named-identifier parameters are not presumed to carry a free-to-read full text (for instance because they're just abstracting services), they may not be marked as limited, registration, or subscription. Some named-identifiers are always free-to-read. For those named identifiers there are no access-indicator parameters; the access level is automatically indicated by the template. These named identifiers are: For embargoed pmc that will become available in the future, see pmc-embargo-date. TemplateData for Cite web Formats a citation to a website using the provided information such as URL and title. Used only for sources that are not correctly described by the specific citation templates for books, journals, news sources, etc.Template parametersThis template has custom formatting.The surname of the author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link'; can suffix with a numeral to add additional authorsGiven or first name, middle names, or initials of the author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link'; can suffix with a numeral to add additional authorsTitle of existing Wikipedia article about the author; can suffix with a numeral to add additional authorsThe surname of the second author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link2'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the second author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the second author.The surname of the third author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link3'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the third author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the third author.The surname of the fourth author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link4'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the fourth author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the fourth author.The surname of the fifth author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link5'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the fifth author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the fifth author.The surname of the sixth author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link6'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the sixth author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the sixth author.The surname of the seventh author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link7'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the seventh author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the seventh author.The surname of the eighth author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link8'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the eighth author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the eighth author.The surname of the ninth author; don't wikilink, use 'author-link9'. If nine authors are defined, then only eight will show and 'et al.' will show in place of the last author.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the ninth author; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the ninth author.List of authors as a free form list. Use of this parameter is discouraged, "lastn" to "firstn" are preferable. Warning: do not use if last or any of its aliases are used.Replaces the name of the first author with em dashes or text; set to a numeric value 'n' to set the dash 'n' em spaces wide; set to a text value to display the text without a trailing author separator; for example, 'with' insteadNumber of authors to display before 'et al.' is used. By default, all authors are displayed. Examples: |display-authors=2 will display only the first two authors in a citation followed by et al. |display-authors=etal displays all authors in the list followed by et al.Set to 'amp' or 'and' to change the separator between the last two names of the name list to ' & ' or ' and ', respectively. Set to 'vanc' to display name lists in Vancouver style.Full date when the source was published; if unknown, use access-date instead; do not wikilinkYear of the source being referenced; deprecated in favor of 'date', except for the special case of ISO dates with disambiguating letterOriginal date of publication; provide specificsThe surname of the editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor-link'; can suffix with a numeral to add additional editors.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor-link'; can suffix with a numeral to add additional editors; alias of 'editor1-first'Title of existing Wikipedia article about the editor; can suffix with a numeral to add additional editorsThe surname of the second editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor2-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the second editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the second editor.The surname of the third editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor3-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the third editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the third editor.The surname of the fourth editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor4-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the fourth editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the fourth editor.The surname of the fifth editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor5-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the fifth editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the fifth editor.The surname of the sixth editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor6-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the sixth editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the sixth editor.The surname of the seventh editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor7-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the seventh editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the seventh editor.The surname of the eighth editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor8-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the eighth editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the eighth editor.The surname of the ninth editor; don't wikilink, use 'editor9-link'.Given or first name, middle names, or initials of the ninth editor; don't wikilink.Title of existing Wikipedia article about the ninth editor.Used to record other (non-author) contributions to the work, such as 'Illustrated by John Smith' or 'Translated by John Smith'. Only one ''others'' parameter is allowed: e.g., 'Illustrated by Jane Doe; Translated by John Smith'The title of the source page on the website; will display with quotation marks added. Usually found at the top of your web browser. Not the name of the website.For titles in languages that do not use a Latin-based alphabet (Arabic, Chinese, Cyrillic, Greek, Hebrew, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, etc). Prefix with two-character ISO639-1 language code followed by a colon. For Japanese use: |script-title=ja:...An English language title, if the source cited is in a foreign language; 'language' is recommendedThe URL of the online location where the text of the publication can be found. Requires schemes of the type "https://..." or maybe even the protocol relative scheme "//..."Classification of the access restrictions on the URL ('registration', 'subscription' or 'limited')If set to 'live', the title display is adjusted; useful for when the URL is archived preemptively but still live. Set to "dead" or 'usurped' for broken links. Entering 'unfit' or 'usurped' makes the original link not appear at all.The URL of an archived copy of a web page, if or in case the URL becomes unavailable; requires 'archive-date'Date when the original URL was archived; do not wikilinkFormat of the archived copy; examples: PDF, DOC, XLS; do not specify HTMLThe full date when the original URL was accessed; do not wikilinkTitle (name) of the website (or its short URL if no plain-language title is discernible); may be wikilinked; will display in italics. Having both 'publisher' and 'website' is redundant in many cases.Series identifier when the source is part of a series, such as a book series or a journalName of the publisher; may be wikilinked. Having both 'publisher' and 'website' (a.k.a. 'work') is redundant in many cases.Geographical place of publication; usually not wikilinked; omit when the publication name includes place; alias of 'place'Page in the source that supports the content; displays after 'p.'Pages in the source that support the content (not an indication of the number of pages in the source); displays after 'pp.'May be used instead of 'page' or 'pages' where a page number is inappropriate or insufficientThe language in which the source is written, if not English; use the full language name or one of the standard MediaWiki language codes; do not use icons or templates; separate multiple languages with commas (with no 'and' before the last one)Additional information about the media type of the source; format in sentence caseFormat of the work referred to by 'url'; examples: PDF, DOC, XLS; do not specify HTMLPublication place shows after title; if 'place' or 'location' are also given, they are displayed before the title prefixed with 'written at'Date of publication when different from the date the work was written; do not wikilinkName of the entity hosting the original copy of the work, if different from the publisher. This entity is committed not to alter the work.Set to 'y' to suppress the 'p.' or 'pp.' display with 'page' or 'pages' when inappropriate (such as 'Front cover')An identifier for arXive electronic preprints of scientific papersAmazon Standard Identification Number; 10 charactersASIN top-level domain for Amazon sites other than the USBibliographic Reference Code (REFCODE); 19 charactersbiorXiv identifier; 6 digitsCiteSeerX identifier; found after the 'doi=' query parameterDigital Object Identifier; begins with '10.'The date that the DOI was determined to be brokenInternational Standard Book Number; use the 13-digit ISBN where possibleInternational Standard Serial Number; 8 characters; may be split into two groups of four using a hyphenJahrbuch über die Fortschritte der Mathematik classification codeJSTOR identifierLibrary of Congress Control NumberMathematical Reviews identifierOnline Computer Library Center numberOpen Library identifierOffice of Scientific and Technical Information identifierPubMed Center article numberPubMed Unique IdentifierRequest for Comments numberSocial Science Research NetworkZentralblatt MATH journal identifierA unique identifier used where none of the specialized ones are applicableRelevant text quoted from the source; displays last, enclosed in quotes; must include terminating punctuationAn anchor identifier; can be made the target of wikilinks to full referencesThe closing punctuation for the citation; ignored if 'quote' is definedSpecify the edition or revision of the source, when applicable. For example: '2nd' or '5.1'. What you supply here is suffixed by ' ed.'If the full text is available from ADS via this Bibcode, type 'free'.If the full text is free to read via the DOI, type 'free'.If the full text is free to read via the HDL, type 'free'.If the full text is free to read on Jstor, type 'free'.If the full text is free to read on OpenLibrary, type 'free'.If the full text is free to read on OSTI, type 'free'.The news agency (wire service) that provided the content; examples: Associated Press, Reuters, Agence France-PresseThis template produces COinS metadata; see COinS in Wikipedia for background information.